# The Chinese Communist Party, the United Front and Triads: Patriotism, Business and Organized Crime

The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) engaged actively with Hong Kong and Macau Triads during the 1980s and 1990s, in order to ensure that they would not disrupt the negotiation process and the festivities for the handover of these colonial territories to China. The CCP considered triads as a potential threat, owing to their former links with the Nationalist Party troops and nationalist gangsters. Since then however, to counter the indigenization of the Republic of China on Taiwan and the rise of Taiwanese identity and in order to promote the unity of a “greater China”, the CCP has encouraged the nationalist stance of Hongmen networks, to which the Triads belong, as well as their political activism. This case highlights the reality of a United Front policy that has been ongoing over the last forty years, towards these social margins, yet in a perspective that has gradually reversed as a consequence of a paradigmatic shift that reflects the CCP’s own political transformation.

*This is a translation of http://www.fasopo.org/sites/default/files/varia3_n47.pdf using https://www.deepl.com/en/translator by https://twitter.com/jnzst. The paper included the above English introduction. What follows was automatically translated from French with a few minor edits. The numbers refer to footnotes in the original paper, which I haven't translated.*

---

In 2014, small criminal groups mistreated Hong Kong students during the Occupy Central demonstrations. Three years later, in Taiwan, individuals linked to local crime and reunificationist parties attacked Hong Kong Democratic MPs visiting the island, and then island students protesting against the holding of cultural events related to mainland China. Victims often refer to these acts as "United Front" acts (tongyi zhanxian统一战线), suggesting that they see them as the hand of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). This accusation, rarely substantiated when it was made, is nevertheless recurrent. The notion, which is approximate, therefore attracts attention but must be deconstructed in order to be transformed into a field of political analysis.

Hong Kong and Taiwanese Hong Kong and Taiwanese activists, democrats and pro-independence activists, who oppose the CCP's authoritarian stance and irredentist claim1, but who are not interested in its internal dogmatic issues and history, tend to see the term "Tongzhan" (统战) - abbreviated to United Front - as the neologism translatable as "the battle of reunification". This bias reduces the notion to a generic term applicable to all acts supporting Chinese claims on Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan: lobbying, intimidation, assault, retaliation... led by the Party or its affiliates. However, the notion, in a broader perspective, points out above all the astonishing longevity of a revolutionary tool.

The Komintern exported the "United Front" to China in the 1920s in order to create an alliance between the "national bourgeoisie", embodied by the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang - KMT) and the young CCP. This rapprochement was chaotic, marked by violent ruptures and frustrated reconciliations, particularly in the face of the Japanese threat during the Second World War and until the civil war that ended in 1949 with the victory of Mao Zedong (毛泽东) on the Chinese continent and the flight of Chiang Kai-shek (Jiang Jieshi 蔣介石) to Taiwan. In 1949, the United Front served as a constituent framework to transform the People's Republic of China (PRC) into a national, rather than a purely communist, political regime.  The concept was then swept away by the various Maoist utopias of the 1950s and 1960s and became an ill-defined vestige of the revolutionary age. Detached from this past time, its use is often characterized by PRC observers only as a Chinese synonym for lobbying or soft power.

The keys to understanding its current use by the PCC do, however, lie in its dogmatic function. More than a concept, the United Front represents a framework for action validated by history. A kind of "ideological dispensation", it allows the CCP, for much of the 20th century, to forge temporary alliances with enemies of communism to enable it to impose itself in a territory when the conditions are not met to make revolution there. However, the Party's abandonment of the revolutionary perspective did not mean a renunciation of this tool. The United Front was reactivated in the early 1980s, in a "patriotic" form (aiguo zhuyi爱国主义), in order to transcend its too "revolutionary" aspect. Thanks to this semantic transformation, the CCP can project itself towards everything else, as long as it is "patriotic", that is, it defends or accepts socialism, the unity of the country and/or the domination of the Communist Party. The United Front, designed to take power within a revolutionary horizon, thus became one of the instruments by which the CCP emerged from its revolutionary culture and propelled its sovereign ambitions into the near external territories of Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan.

The United Front is therefore not simply a historically dated label or a relatively indefinite acrimony; and cannot be understood in its political scope if it is limited to the meaning given to it by the victims of abuses; even if the reunificationist problem is now a major focus.  It is now a flexible operating concept, adaptable to the ambitions and constraints of the PCC as it undergoes post-revolutionary reconfiguration. As a result, for the contemporary period, the United Front represents an analytical notion that makes it possible to decode and reconcile scattered data more or less related to the Party, and to make them tangible markers of its changes2.  These markers are revealed in the very organisation of the mechanism that embodies it, either on its own3 or in an incidental way4, as well as through its actions, however informal they may be, or their reception by the so-called "targets" (duixiang对象) of the United Front: those who need to be approached to rally them to the Beijing cause, or at least to buy their neutrality5. Broadly speaking, these "targets" fall into two main categories: those of a United Front from the "top", political structures and prominent non-communist personalities, and those of a United Front from the "bottom", any type of individuals or social organizations considered of lower rank6.  The cross-referencing of these structural and factual parameters provides a perspective for the detailed decoding of often neglected, heterogeneous and apparently irrelevant data taken in isolation.

The Hong Kong and Macao gangsters, known as the "triads", have been part of these United Front "targets" since the turn of the 1980s. Their anchoring in Hong Kong, where the CPC's irredentist project is taking shape beyond speeches, with the approach of the end of the emphyteutic lease linking part of the territory to the British, in fact, in two ways, one of the essential interlocutors for ensuring local stability there: as lowlands, these criminal structures emerge from the "United Front from below"; by their financial or political basis, their leaders report to the "United Front from above". While, at the time, the compromise displayed between the triads and the CCP attracted media attention because of its sulphurous nature, its perspective remained insufficiently substantiated. In order to compensate for this blind spot in research on the Chinese world, this article will deconstruct the known factual discourse and complete it, as far as possible, in order to highlight the main lines underlying this rapprochement. As the available sources are scarce, both on the side of the triads, which most often act outlawed, and on the side of Chinese power, they will be supplemented by the use of atypical media, when they themselves are stamped by their authors as carrying an underlying political message, such as genre films. Together, these will allow us to accurately reconstruct and date, despite persistent grey areas, the complex and fluctuating relationships that the CCP has had with the triads over the two decades preceding the Hong Kong and Macao retrocessions.

The analysis of the action of the United Front that emerged at that time will serve to understand the modalities of similar work with Taiwan, again in order to prepare for reunification, through adjustments linked to the evolution of the CCP and its adaptation to the specific democratic characteristics of the islands. Under Deng Xiaoping (邓小平7), the Party was cautiously wavering between a thwarted exit from Maoism, uncontrolled Hungarian otherness and chaotic negotiations with the United Kingdom. With Jiang Zemin (江泽民8), the state-controlled CCP assumed its regalian authoritarianism, increasingly cutting back on the formula "one country, two systems" (yi guo liang zhi一国两制), as it had been presented for Hong Kong in order to reassure international public opinion. From Hu Jintao (胡锦涛9) the nationalized Party claims the entire heritage of Chinese history and therefore of the two revolutions of the 20th century, not only the communist revolution of 1949 but also the nationalist revolution of 1911, gradually assuming the flag of nationalism in the name of the national novel it wants to embody. Since 2012, with Xi Jinping (习近平10), expansionist nationalism has ostentatiously supplanted the patriotism of the 1980s and 1990s, which was a kind of outstretched hand of the lowest common denominator towards the non-communist forces of the Chinese nation, especially the enemies - nationalists - of the civil war. On the other hand, the legalism, displayed since Hu Jintao and amplified by Xi Jinping, prevents the Party, unlike the time of Jiang Zemin, from directly addressing gangsters, who are now the subject of large-scale judicial campaigns - such as "hitting hard" (yanda严打) - and from promoting questionable investments and corruption on the Continent in a relaxed way. Finally, there are no methods of resolving the Hong Kong and Macao retrocessions in Taiwan. The reintegration of these two territories was decided through joint declarations with the British and Portuguese respectively, while in Taiwan peaceful reunification can only depend on the consent of the Taiwanese in a democratic framework11. Despite these major differences, the United Front approach is still relevant for two reasons. The first is symbolic: the United Front remains on the dogmatic and historical level the magic weapon (fabao法宝) that allows either to triumph "peacefully" or to prepare the armed struggle (wuzhuang douzheng 武装斗争). The second is more factual: Taiwan being included in the same irredentist arc as Hong Kong and Macao, the Party is encouraged to project into it the whole range of means already apparently tested, however relevant they may have been at the time.

All these differences make the United Front in Taiwan a process adapted to the island's political space and the CCP's transnational ambitions. The challenge is no longer to turn to gangsters, as in Hong Kong and Macau, to bargain for their inaction, but this time to approach and strengthen social groups that act as bridge structures within the "people's sphere" (minjian民间)12, as autonomous civic actors that can counter or swallow up part of the public debate at the local level and within the diaspora13. However, due to China's long social and political history, the triads, part of the diaspora of Southeast Asia and America, as well as small groups that evolve in the shadow of the nationalist army withdrawn to Taiwan in 1949 claim a common identity: the Hongmen ensemble (洪門), formerly known as the "secret society". It is this heterogeneous aggregate that is now targeted in the same logic, in the name of a shared tradition included in Chinese revolutionary history and myth14. On one condition, however, that these factions and their sulphurous image members can uniformly display their legality, individually and collectively, in order to exist as legitimate activists defending the "Greater China "15.

This change in the United Front applied to Taiwan is even less studied than in the previous period. As a result, there is hardly any scientific literature on the subject. Several heuristic difficulties explain this deficiency: the "targets" are now proving to be autonomous socio-political actors and no longer mere violent factotums. They produce their own discourse that does not necessarily appear to be linked to a strategy piloted from Beijing. Their local impact is often negligible, as their members do not have a real visibility in mainstream political life. Their discourse is often not perceived as having a relevant analytical scope, as it is stereotypical and monotonous. As their networks are spread over several countries, their detection and monitoring are very random. As a result, the collection of the sources on which the second part of this article is based was carried out in a very empirical way, in a relatively exploratory logic. All types of media that support and contextualize facts or actions have been taken into account, particularly on the Internet (traditional media, blogs, tabloids, social networks, YouTube, etc.)16, solely on the basis of their factual relevance - which will have to be contextualised. The use of this type of source is assumed as the subject is so fallow. Without it, it would not be possible to define the analytical space that emerges through the confrontation of visions produced by victims of abuses, statements of United Front targets and CCP postures. Not feeding the faces of this kaleidoscope with the available factual data, on the pretext of a lack of scientific research on this theme and its actors, would harm the constitution of an original research that traces, outside the beaten track, the contours of one of the most poorly known aspects of the socio-political mechanisms at stake around Chinese irredentism.

By analysing the changes in the CCP through its relationship with the margins of society in the context of a territorial and national issue that it does not fully understand, this article also contributes to the theme of the relationship between "mafia" and "politics". The diachronic approach chosen highlights the complexity of this interaction, which is much more fluid and composite than usual imagery suggests. The present historicization, limited to a very specific case, underlines the importance of contingency and power relations between these two violent poles in pivotal historical moments, such as post-revolutionary periods. The Chinese trajectory underlines the demarcation lines between the legal and the illegal, both vague and structuring, around a State in formation, both in its institutional means of action, particularly regalian ones, which must replace revolutionary levers, and in the self-representation of its hegemonic, and no longer totalitarian, national function. In doing so, this article also contributes to an implicit criticism of the work or approaches that reify the "mafia" by showing the complexity and plurality of meanings that these organizations can take over time, depending on events or power relations within society.

## The 1980s: The CCP in the face of the uncertainties of the Hong Kong handover

Despite many preconceived ideas, it is not self-evident that the CCP identifies the triads, from the very beginning of the preparation of the Hong Kong handover, as "targets" of United Front work. Unless we want to consider that, in the 1980s, when the Party still displays a revolutionary culture, its approach consists in "softening" (lalong拉拢) individuals and socio-political bodies who, on principle, do not share the communist ideology. This is the case with the Triads, by their nature and history.

### The triads, Kuomintang and PCC

The name Triad appeared under colonial pen. In the nineteenth century, Europeans faced violent structures within the Chinese diasporas - "sworn brotherhoods" - in the English and Dutch counters of Hong Kong, Malaysia and Indonesia, which they could neither understand nor regulate.

Originally, the term is singular. The Triad referred to a particular entity, the Sky and Earth Society (tiandihui天地會)17 which was studied from the 1820s onwards through the prism of the Christian trinity combined with Freemasonry. The functioning of this structure was based on a mystical solidarity, the "Hong family" (Hongmen 洪門), recreating a fraternal bond between individuals who "do not have the same family name" (yixingxiongdi異姓兄弟). It was only a temporary social construction, growing or decreasing according to its activity, the mobility of its members and the vicissitudes it faced. It has split up, recomposed under various names reflecting the ternary idea - the Society of the Three Unions (sanhehui三合會) or the Society of the Three Points (sandianhui三點會).

Between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the generic idea of a mystical and social triadism was transformed, under British impetus, to designate criminal groups. The Triad became the Triads, a myriad of entities with very loose relationships claiming to be Hongmen; and Hongmen became synonymous with Triads for organized crime specialists in Shanghai in 193018 and Hong Kong in 195019. As early as the mid-19th century, the British colonies in Asia adopted anti-triad laws. The most emblematic of them, "The Societies Ordinance Cap 151", the product of this story, was taken in Hong Kong in 194920. It characterizes criminally the membership of the triads by all kinds of evidence: statements, claims of the legendary founding fathers, recitation of initiatory poems and other rites related to Hongmen myths.

In terms of political imagination, some 50 years earlier, at the beginning of the 20th century, the support of violent social movements, including the structures claiming to be Hongmen, was actively sought by Chinese nationalist revolutionaries attempting to overthrow the Qing dynasty. Among them, Sun Yat-sen (孫中山) and Tao Chengzhang (陶成章)21. It did not matter to them whether they were entities attached to the Hongmens, particularly overseas, or structures linked to the Society of Elders and Elders (Gelaohui哥老會), such as Sichuan, Hunan or Zhejiang, the objective was to appropriate their fighting strength and/or to capture their financial resources to carry out the anti-Manchu revolt. To achieve their ends, these revolution activists, long before the historian Eric Hobsbawm, transformed these "bandits22" into "primitives of the revolt23" by "inventing a tradition24" for them, to make them the holders of the revolutionary national spirit. The exercise was repeated by the Nationalist Party to deal with the Japanese threat in the 1930s and 1940s. The approach will strengthen their nationalist imagination in the service of the State defending the territorial integrity of the country25.

In fact, during the unspoken civil war between the CCP and the KMT, both sides tried to exploit these violent social structures. In 1927, the Chiang Kai-shek KMT joined forces with one of them, the Green Strip (Qingbang青幫) to eliminate the Communist Party, which had tried to raise Shanghai from the workers' unions. This convergence opens up important institutional perspectives, as it allows the effective establishment of nationalist power in Nanjing. In the aftermath of the Second World War, as the KMT rout looms, soldiers of the nationalist army seek to federate different margins of society under the guise of organizing anti-communist resistance. The most striking example is the creation, in 1946-1947 in Guangdong, of Hong fashan (洪發山), an organization claiming to be linked to Hong Kong, by General Kot Siu-wong (Ge Zhaohuang 葛肇煌), on its own account. Once emigrated to Hong Kong, Hongfashan gradually transformed into a fractional criminal movement, better known as 14K. Over the decades, nationalist networks, refugees in Thailand and Burma, have specialized in trafficking, particularly heroin from the Golden Triangle, to finance, among other things, the anti-communist struggle.

Ideologically, during the second half of the 20th century, the triads were hardly porous to communist ideas, because of their links with the KMT and their predatory function. In Hong Kong and the former colonies of Southeast Asia, they only appear in the local criminal section.  In China, the CCP did occasionally seek to win some secret societies to its cause during the civil war26.  But once in power, and institutionally this time, the CCP quickly pursued them. The only Hongmen growth to escape repression is the Zhigongdang (致公党27), born of Hongmen diaspora structures during the Republican period; it has become one of eight democratic parties, which the revolutionary CCP tolerates on behalf of the United Front. In Taiwan, the martial law imposed by the KMT from 1949 to 1987 prohibits any public existence of civil society. The Hongmen and assimilates then remained in the shadow of the nationalist army, in a little-known chiaroscuro.

United Front's strategy towards these "targets" in the service of the retrocession of Hong Kong, Macao and reunification with Taiwan will be built and recomposed on this historical basis according to the needs of the CCP.

### "Patriotic" triads at the service of social stability and prosperity

In the late 1970s, as Deng Xiaoping considered taking the PRC out of the Maoist rut, the British wanted to obtain a renewal of their colony's lease in order to secure their investments28. The Chinese refuse it on principle, by anti-imperialism; it will be retrocession. On the other hand, they did not seem to have thought about its practical modalities. The challenge is to combine Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty, or even the eventual reunification of "Greater China", on the one hand, with Deng Xiaoping's policy of reform and openness, on the other. It is therefore necessary to preserve the British colony's economic model in order to attract Hong Kong and Taiwanese investors to the Continent, and more generally foreign capital29. However, the Chinese regime is frightening both Hong Kong and foreign investors. The riots in Macau in 1966 and Hong Kong in 1967, led by local Red Guards, are still remembered.

The preparation of the retrocession is entrusted to the Hong Kong branch of the New China News Agency (Xinhua新华). Without strictly speaking being a United Front structure, it fulfils this role in Hong Kong30. Within the agency, two characters will play a decisive role: Wong Man Fong (Huang Wenfang 黃文放), Cantonese, who was assigned to Xinhua in Hong Kong from 1949 to 1992; and Xu Jiatun (许家屯) who was appointed in July 1983 to head it.

They are responsible for first-hand accounts of the preparations for the handover. In 1997, Wong Man Fong gave lectures published in English under the title China's Resumption of Sovereignty over Hong Kong31. He clearly states that the CCP approached the triads in the 1980s to prepare for the handover. Froidely pragmatic, he does not describe his action as a United Front. However, he uses the related vocabulary: "transforming "negative forces" into "positive forces". As for Xu Jiatun, he recounted his experience in Chinese, under the title Les souvenirs hongkongais de Xu Jiatun32, after being ousted from the management of the Hong Kong branch of the Xinhua agency in 1990. He described Hong Kong as a strategic issue for the United Front. The CCP, in a weak position in the colony, must soften the local population and pro-British Hong Kong businessmen, while avoiding that local communists seize the opportunity to start a revolution and that KMT networks work to prevent any political normalization. Xu Jiatun seems to have to invent pragmatic solutions on a daily basis, while no strategy has been defined on how to proceed in Hong Kong. It is up to him to protect the social and economic stability of the colony, while protecting himself from the apparatus struggles that are taking place at the CCP summit in Beijing33.

Broadly speaking, Xu Jiatun represents a United Front from above, open, while Wong Man Fong embodies a United Front from below, in the shadows. The lack of consideration that each one has for the other suggests that they ignore or even, at times, oppose each other. Wong Man Fong justifies his approaches to the triads by the lessons learned from history: in 1927, the CCP suffered a stunning failure in Shanghai against a KMT allied to the Du Yuesheng Green Band (杜月笙). On the other hand, the work done by Zhou Enlai (周恩来) towards Du made it possible to take Shanghai in 1949, avoiding chaos. For Wong Man Fong, it is therefore a purely utilitarian relationship, in order to avoid any risk of social unrest. He himself occasionally used the services of local thugs in 1976 to secure the tribute ceremonies to the deceased Zhou Enlai and Mao Zedong that Xinhua organized in Hong Kong,34 since he did not seem able to expect active support from the British police and could not benefit from an own law enforcement agency authorized to be present on the colonial public road around the place of the ceremonies.

In December 1981, Deng Xiaoping, faced with the United Kingdom's demands, asked Liao Chengzhi (廖承志), the leading figure of the United Front for Overseas France, to propose a concrete solution for Hong Kong's future; he had three months to develop it35. In the first half of 1982, Hong Kong delegations came to Beijing. Deng Xiaoping tells them that many of the triad members, the majority even, are "good "36. This declaration opens up a working line that took shape in July 1982, when Wong Man Fong was questioned by Liao Chengzhi on Hong Kong's "criminal groups" (banghui幫會), their "capacity" (qingkuang力量的情況 liliang) and their "political inclinations" (qingxiang政治傾向 zhengzhi). Liao asks him to establish contacts with their members so that "their allegiance is obtained" (zhengqu tamen zhengzhi zhuanxiang爭取他們政治轉向); "at the very least" (zuishao最少) that they "do not oppose or break" (bu fandui he bu pohuai不反對和不破壞) stability and prosperity37. Wong Man Fong, who does not know any "high-ranking leaders" (cengci bu gao層次不高)38 in the Hong Kong criminal world, takes more than a year to establish contact39, which highlights the absence of any real pre-existing links to this request.

While Beijing and London continued their negotiations, the CCP established a United Front that definitively turned its back on the revolution, integrating overseas Chinese capitalism40. Everything was now in place for Xu Jiatun, who had recently arrived in Hong Kong, to practice a policy of openness from July 1983. Ensuring the neutrality of the KMT's networks is, for him, essential, while diplomatic tensions between Beijing and London are causing the stock market to falter. In September 1983 and June 1984, Deng Xiaoping reiterated his call to the triads41. This was the time when Wong Man Fong began to meet their leaders. He asks them to control themselves and not to endanger the balance of the local model42. His interlocutors at 14K and Wo On Lok (He'a nle和安樂), also known as Shui Fong (Shuifang水房), quickly became loyal in exchange for Beijing's non-interference in their affairs43. Wong Man Fong wrote a confidential report on the issue, which was sent to Deng Xiaoping by Xu Jiatun44.

In September 1984, the draft of the Sino-British Joint Declaration outlined Hong Kong's future, noting that nothing would change after 1997. The formula "one country, two systems" is essential. However, negotiations on the concrete implementation of the retrocession were soon underway. The British could use any disturbance of public order against the Chinese side. On 3 October, Deng Xiaoping reiterated, before delegations from Hong Kong and Macau, his positive assessments of the triads, while highlighting the autonomy Hong Kong will enjoy. To integrate the triads into the great Chinese history being written, Deng underlines their belonging to the "descendants of the mythical emperors Shennong and Huangdi" (Yan Huang zisun炎黃子孫). He reiterated this message on television45. Again, this discourse can be considered programmatic46. This hypothesis is corroborated by the fact that, at the end of 1984, Xu Jiatun met with the leaders of the Sun Yee On triad (Xinyi' an新義安)47, to whom he promised the possibility of making their business grow in exchange for Hong Kong's stability48.

In December, the Joint Declaration was ratified. Therefore, the United Front from above is needed to build future institutions. Despite some jolts, the idea of a return to China under the "one country, two systems" scheme is rooted in Hong Kong opinion49. The question of the triads is less topical: there is no longer any need to court them, social peace has been bought against the continuation of their business in China.

The use of triads therefore seems to have been a mode of operation within the CCP's reach, when it was caught unaware by its unpreparedness and difficulty in conceiving the management of Hong Kong's retrocession. At the time, the Communist Party was groping its way out of the Maoist revolution to better reclaim the Maoist institutional heritage. This reappropriation could be carried out via the ideological apparatus inherited from the entire history of the communist revolution. Thus, the United Front, a revolutionary dogma that makes it possible to delay the revolutionary moment without giving the impression of losing sight of it, was reactivated. The United Front has been declined to all non-communist components of Chinese society, including its urban shallows in the steps of the empire, because of the memorable legacy of the civil war. The 1927 Shanghai benchmark, which had allowed the KMT to contain the CCP's momentum by breaking the United Front and allying itself with the gangsters, had a mirror effect on Hong Kong in the 1980s. The problem, real or supposed, of the triads, historically affiliated with the Party and the nationalist army, was thus added to the sum of the uncertainties that the CCP had to overcome in the British colony.

It is therefore possible to consider that the approach of Deng Xiaoping and Liao Chengzhi, declined by Wong Man Fong and Xu Jiatun, originally had only a purely tactical perspective, carried out partly blindly. At that time, the CCP had only to offer, at a lower cost, to the triads and all its former class enemies, an a priori recognition of their "patriotism" coupled with the expected opportunities associated with the opening of the special economic zones, in a context where the PRC was frantically seeking to attract funds to China via Hong Kong. The triads were thus introduced into the CCP game, as a threat to be circumscribed by bargaining, but not as political actors. However, the process has made it an available lever to meet the Communist Party's future challenges in implementing its irredentist policy.

## The 1990s: repression and negotiation

The history of the United Front towards the triads could have ended there if the repression of the 1989 democratic movement on the Continent had not brutally broken the reformist and consensual image that the CCP was trying to give itself. The violence against the demonstrators in Tian'anmen Square upset the English colony. Times have changed, however: Deng Xiaoping wanted to gain acceptance for Hong Kong's return to China as the CCP waved its way out of the revolution. It is up to Jiang Zemin, who is committed to the authoritarian transformation of the CCP into a State Party, to succeed in the handover. A new phase in United Front's work with the triads began: the use of regalian force alternated, even married, with the pragmatism involved. The United Front's approach will now be ostensibly supported by the Ministry of Public Security (gong'anb u共安部) and its Minister Tao Siju (陶驷驹).

After June 1989, Hong Kong's political, media and religious figures relied on networks with relays in China and the experience of illegal border crossings to exfiltrate protesters50. The "Yellow Bird" operation (huangque xingdong黃雀行動) is being set up 51. It is based in particular on Wong Choong Ying (Huang Junyuan 黃俊原), known as Wong Chun (黃俊), a leader of the Sun Yee On triad52, and Chan Tat-ching (Chen Dazheng 陳達鉦), a smuggler with connections in the lowlands53. To remedy this atypical alliance between democrats and traffickers and prevent Hong Kong from becoming a subversive base, the Party combines negotiation with repression54. After the arrest in China of two of his men, Chan Tat-ching made a pact with Beijing for their release against the cessation of his activities. Gradually, the CCP thus obtained the disengagement of the gangsters in 199055.

### Collusions in the name of the national interest

In 1992, Jiang Zemin took over the CCP. Thanks to his trip to southern Deng Xiaoping, he was able to intensify economic reform, particularly in the neighbouring province of Guangdong, Hong Kong. Internationally, negotiations were getting tougher with the British, who were seeking to leave a democratic legacy in the colony before their departure.

The Chinese positions reflect the complexity of the situation as the deadline for the retrocession becomes clear. In March, Fang Bao (方苞), a senior Guangdong official, deplored the upsurge in violence and corruption in the province due to the infiltration of the Hong Kong triads. Qiao Shi (乔石), an unfortunate candidate for the CCP against Jiang Zemin in 1989, echoed him by stating that triads will never be tolerated in the PRC56. Shortly thereafter, he was contradicted by Public Safety Minister Tao Siju, who indicated, as Deng Xiaoping had done in the early 1980s, that he would maintain contact with triad members if they were working for Hong Kong's prosperity; and that as such they could legally invest in China. Locally, there is concern that retrocession may mean a blank cheque for the triads after 199757.

The dominant family of the Sun Yee On triad embarks on investment projects in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone. The sons of its founder, Heung Chin (Xiang Qian 向前), establish links with senior CCP officials in Guangdong. In 1991, one of them went to Hong Kong to attend the birthday celebration of Heung Wah Yim (Xiang Huayan 向華炎)58. In 1992, Charles Heung Wah-Keung (Xiang Huaqiang 向華強) and Jimmy Heung Wah-Shing (Xiang Huasheng 向華勝) found themselves in the colony in conflict with newcomers from the Continent. Well established in the film industry, they see their actors forced to play in film productions financed by members of the Grand Circle (daquanbang大圈幫), otherwise known as the Big circle boys (daquanzai / Tai Huen Chai 大圈仔)59. This continental criminal nebula, noted for its violence, quickly became autonomous after having served as a factotum for the Hong Kong triads 60.  The Heung are organizing demonstrations in Hong Kong against this violent competition, which is disrupting public order in the colony and undermining the prosperity of the film industry61. They are also approaching Ye Xuanping (叶选平), Vice-President of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), the supreme political body of the United Front mechanism, which works for the propaganda of "Greater China "62.

As much as Beijing blows the heat with the Hong Kong triads, so much it blows the cold with the British. The CCP criticizes the latter for their inability to maintain law and order in the colony and to curb the unrest caused by the triads in China. The Party is playing the security argument it feared would be used against it in the 1980s with an overtone. In March 1993, Li Peng (李鹏) stated that the fight against crime in China is difficult. Shortly thereafter, Public Safety Minister Tao Siju argued that arms smuggling into the PRC was a problem that could only be solved through international cooperation; cooperation blocked by the British because of the impossible conciliation over the terms of the Hong Kong handover63.

On April 8, 1993, when diplomatic tensions were at their highest, Public Safety Minister Tao Siju reiterated that it was possible to unite with the triads, provided they preserved Hong Kong's stability and prosperity.64 It was at this time that a luxurious nightclub, the Top Ten, opened in Beijing, of which he was a partner alongside Charles Heung Wah-Keung and Sun Yee On. In August 1993, the Heung brothers opened a film studio in Shenzhen, attended by CCPCC Vice-Chair Ye Xuanping, whose son, Ye Xinlong, had been living in Hong Kong since 1992. He will become Charles Heung's partner in a Hong Kong investment company. These disturbing relationships are taking place in Shanghai, where members of the People's Liberation Army run nightclubs with the Sun Yee On, while their counterparts in the Ministry of Public Security operate reputable brothels.65

The Jiang Zemin era, that of pragmatic authoritarianism, is an era of blurred lines between the legal and the illegal. Maoist communism had put an end to collusion between the KMT and gangsters in the PRC. Jiang Zemin's capitalist statism has a hint of Shanghai from the republican era. However, the similarity must be put into perspective. The KMT of the 1920s and 1930s, in a weak position in a chaotic China, needed to rely on the Green Band, the Hongmen or the Gelaohui. The sovereign CCP of the 1990s established a de-complexed United Front in which the Hong Kong triads negotiated their political submission around shared financial interests. Unlike the republican era, the ruling party sets the rules of the alliance, supported by the regal repressive forces, in exchange for a mutual material benefit.

### The end of the extended hand policy

While some triad members follow the path of the Sun Yee On Heung people, others deviate from it and enter a race for violence to control their criminal niches. Two 14K figures, who will become United Front targets in the 2010's, illustrate these opposing movements. The first is the Hong Kong-based Siu Yuk Shing (Xiao Xucheng 蕭旭成), known as Siu Wah (Xiao Hua 蕭華); he invests in real estate in Shenzhen. The second, the Macanese Wan Kuok-koi (Yin Guoju 尹國駒), known as "Broken Tooth" (Bang-a koi / Beng Yaju 崩牙駒), faces Hong Kong residents of the 14K, Sun Yee On, Shui Fong and Grand Circle who are trying to establish themselves in casinos and the night world. These struggles take the form of murders, sometimes perpetrated by machine-gun fire in the street. Kidnappings are increasing, victims are being held in the PRC. Nevertheless, the United Front's approach remains relevant, while being more subtle. According to Chan Wai-Man (Chen Huimin 陳惠敏), a film star, martial arts star and member of Hong Kong's 14K, in 1996, Chinese police66 gathered the triadic leaders to remind them that they were all patriots, and that it was therefore desirable that they should not disturb the reunification of the country67.

This opening is not definitive. The CCP's outstretched hand policy towards the triads has turned these "stability groups" into an uncontrolled threat to public order. Wong Man Fong, in May 1997, mentioned that the approach is purely political and will have no impact on the local repressive system. It adds that at the end of the retrocession process it must be rethought and reduced in scope68. In July 1997, Hong Kong's retrocession ceremony went off without a hitch. The CCP, in a position of strength, sends intelligence officers to Macao to target criminal groups69. Broken Tooth was arrested in Macau in May 1998. Perpetrators of crimes committed in Hong Kong, refugees in the PRC, are convicted, regardless of their origin (continental or Hong Kong), under Chinese law70. Throughout 1999, the fight against organised crime intensified both on the Continent and in Hong Kong and Macau. Symbolically, the end of the extended hand policy ended on 23 November 1999 with Dent's sentence in Macau being broken to 15 years in prison. On December 19 at midnight, the Portuguese colony came under Chinese sovereignty. The People's Liberation Army is expanding around Macao. The media are celebrating the success of the operation by indicating, according to Jiang Zemin, that the next step will be Taiwan71.

Many grey areas remain around the CCP's policy towards the triads. At the very least, it can be said to have accompanied the retrocession process for two decades. This story goes far beyond that of a corrupt CCP whose members were guided by the satisfaction of their personal interests alone. The changes of the United Front in the service of an anti-colonial irredentism illustrate the transformations of the Party. In the 1980s, Xinhua, an infra-diplomatic structure, cautiously promoted China's return to the British colony; it was a question of practising a policy of influence in a situation of weakness.  The 1990s were the years of a United Front openly supported by the Chinese State; the challenge was to complete the planned handover. Throughout the period, the political objective of strengthening the CCP supersedes any legal or moral questioning of the criminal status of the targets and that of the Ministry of Public Safety, which is responsible for fighting crime. The only requirement is to ensure the stability of the retrocession process. As much as extra-legal means have been used to implement the United Front, so much so has the law been used to exert regalian repression on targets who continued to disturb public order, which has become an element of negotiation.

One thing is certain: this policy, by facilitating their access to the Chinese economy, has changed the face of the Hong Kong triads. To be allowed to be part of the legal investors in the PRC, they had to show their "patriotism". During the 1980s, the extremely vague notion seems to have designated only a commitment not to disturb local public order in exchange, it seems, for a modest laissez-faire attitude towards their trafficking in China. For the next decade, it would mean a more effective allegiance to the CCP; in the name of a clearly assumed prosaic and cynical bargaining, extended to the entire capitalist spectrum of the Chinese economic boom. Because of this dual challenge, political and commercial, the pact has become more normative: it is no longer a question of expressing a simple agreement in principle, but of giving guarantees as to its implementation. In any case, this is what can be deduced from the diptych of the Hong Kong filmmaker Johnnie To (Du Qifeng 杜琪峰), Election72 of 2005-2006. Under the guise of a genre film, he describes how Hong Kong gangsters are allowed to enter the legal economy of Guangdong73. The second part has an inspiring subtitle: "The most precious is harmony" (yi he wei gui 以和為貴)74. This harmony takes the form of a deal that an executive of the Guangdong Ministry of Public Security offers to a triad leader who wants to become an honest and wealthy businessman in the PRC. This character then echoes Tao Siju's statements on the patriotism of the triads, indicating that the term has as a corollary the need to win the internal elections of his criminal family in Hong Kong, under penalty of being unable to invest legally in China. The objective is to oust the most dangerous and uncontrollable Hong Kong gangsters by subcontracting this charge to the person entering Hong Kong territory. The ministry only needs the allegiance of the next elected official and his commitment to act in this direction, the result of the vote being ensured by the support of the many other mafia cadres who have already made an act of submission to the Chinese police.

The formula yi he wei gui is punctually mentioned in the writings of Front Uni75, particularly in the passages on the KMT. From an interpretative point of view, it characterizes the modalities of its action76: the principle (gui规), homophone of "precious" (贵), is peace or harmony; it is the prerequisite for any political and economic recognition.  Those who are able to integrate/synthesize (zonghe综合) their universe and embody the sum of the reconciled forces (he和) can benefit from a favourable legal framework for their investments in the PRC. This deconstruction not only gives meaning to the action against the Hong Kong triads in the 1980s and 1990s, but it can also serve as an analytical framework for understanding the changes of the United Front in Taiwan by a CCP that now openly claims to be a legitimist irredentism in the name of the whole history of China.

The Jiang Zemin years made the United Front towards gangsters an assumed operating lever, in an amoral context at the service of the Party's authoritarian transformation into an uncomplicated regal power. However, the hand extended to the triads cannot be summed up as the result of the corruption of Chinese power. This practice led by the State summit seems to be nothing more than the extreme avatar of forced-march pragmatism that allowed Jiang Zemin to impose himself and relaunch the CCP after the Tian'anmen crisis. In this particular case, as with the rest of his strategy within the device, it seems that he "only needs" (zhiyao 只要)77 the stakes are worthwhile for bargaining to take place.

As before, the triads remain at the level of factotums to be channelled to control public order. However, the framework of this extended hand is changing: under Deng Xiaoping, it was an infra-state negotiation with many unknowns. From now on, it is the State-Party that sets the rules. While the United Front remains the dogmatic framework that allows the Party to continue the negotiations initiated during the previous decade, it is now the sovereign power that determines the modalities of their application and sanctions their abuse by law. The approach reinforces their function as a "target" available to meet the challenges facing the Communist Party to extend its irredentist ambition in the Strait of Formosa. Deng Xiaoping instituted the partnership with the triads in the perspective of its policy of reform and openness, territorial and economic, through revolutionary dogma and history. Jiang Zemin institutionalized it by the state. The next section of this article analyses a variation of this theme in the light of the nationalisation of the PCC.

## The nation-state party in the face of Taiwanese democratic otherness

In the 1980s and 1990s, United Front's concrete policy towards the triads did not include Taiwan, although the economic transformation of the PRC was undoubtedly accompanied by an ambitious and revengeful political perspective; ending the civil war and thus preparing for the possibility of great reunification78. However, the reform laboratory in Hong Kong has similar effects on Taiwanese gangsters. In 1989, Zhang Zhen (張真), a Taipei bandit who had taken refuge on the Continent, exfiltrated an artist friend who feared repression after the Tian'anmen movement. He ceased his activity after the United Front Labour Department obtained him, on 7 November 1989, an identity card issued in Beijing because he turned out to be a "patriotic compatriot" (aiguo tongbao爱国同胞)79.

It is only after the combination of two unconnected factors on either side of the Strait of Formosa that the CCP extends and adapts the United Front policy applied in Hong Kong for Taiwan. In 2000 on the Continent, Jiang Zemin articulated the concept of the Three Representations (san ge daibiao三个代表), which included in and around the Party all the Chinese social components that serve the development of the country and the self-designation of the CCP as the vanguard of the nation in movement. The CCP thus broke with its totalitarian domination, which denied national diversity, and replaced it with a hegemony that encompasses all the wealth of Chinese society, which recognizes it as politically legitimate. In the case at hand, the Three Representations allow for the institutional consideration of "patriotic" investors.

In the same year in Taiwan, the Progressive Democratic Party (Minjindang民進黨) won executive power through the ballot box.  This first insular political alternation disrupted all the habits of the civil war and the Cold War between the CCP and the KMT. The frustrated but reassuring relationship between these two brothers, enemies of the revolution, is disrupted by the arrival of this new political actor, who shares neither their history nor their myth of "Greater China". Its separatist ambitions, which are only expressed against the institutions inherited from the KMT, offend the PRC by cracking the common but complex front around the idea of China's unity including Taiwan. Moreover, the rise of the Progressive Democratic Party through the vote introduces the island voter into the debate as a new unknown, since the political spaces around the Strait of Formosa had not previously been impacted by democratic hazards, or at least seemed to be maintained as they were by traditional authoritarian methods80.

This evolution creates an axis of convergence between the worlds of the KMT and the PCC, in the name of their shared values, drawn from a flattened past that they wrote in opposition but together, in the face of this contingency. The Communist Party is therefore intensifying its United Front policy from above, towards the KMT cadres, against the new major enemy represented by the Progressive Democratic Party. At the same time, the weakening of the KMT through the emergence of citizenship, which he himself promoted by reforming the institutions of the Republic of China in Taiwan, allows a fringe of the nationalist electorate to claim the expression of its own political voice, outside the apparatus of the State Party inherited from Sun Yat-sen, but in the name of this heritage. The Hongmen and assimilates, who claim to be the civic holders of the nationalist spirit81, are becoming new "targets" of Front Uni from below, which would now take into account the unknown that the island voter represents. In this new configuration, these social margins become political margins that the CCP has every interest in accompanying and enhancing in their political-identity claim, in order to produce a structured alternative discourse in the face of the growth of Taiwanese identity driven by the vote. This time the issue is very different from that of the Hong Kong triads, which were perceived only as a social threat that had to be curbed in an undemocratic context. However, the whole forms a large whole, however heterogeneous it may be, since the triads are a historical component of the Hongmen. It is therefore the Hongmen nebula, including the triads, that becomes a transnational "target" of the United Front, on the condition that it federates and demonstrates its political respectability, so that it can act and influence in the political debate against Taiwan's independence.

### The World Hongmen Union

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, with the lifting of martial law in Taiwan, entities such as the Hongmens or the Green Belt, well established in the militarist circles of the KMT, have the right to exist in the open. The multiple sub-groups of the Hongmen take advantage of this legalization (hefahua合法化) to reactivate themselves, as social organizations (shetuan 社團), or even to transform themselves into microparties. Those of the Hongmens present themselves as the legatees of the Sky and Earth Society, the Tiandihui, highlighting its role in the 1911 revolution; a way of distancing themselves from the image of gangsters associated with the triads82. However, this evolution remains limited to an ageing microcosm composed of retired soldiers from the nationalist army.

This politicization will take shape, starting in 1999, with the appointment of Liu Huijin (劉會進)83 as head of the Wushengshan (五聖山) - an entity created in the 1930s from five Hongmen subgroups in Shanghai to counter the influence that the Green Band gained through Du Yuesheng's interpersonal skills at the KMT84. The shock of the election of the pro-independence politician Chen Shui-bian (陳水扁) to the presidency in 2000 pushed Liu to want to federate the Hongmen85. At the same time, a United Front from the top initiated by Beijing towards Chen's leading nationalist opponents aimed to soften them up and bring them to China. This United Front from above fully recognizes the new island situation since a similar approach is also being taken towards local figures of the Progressive Democratic Party.  The approach is coupled with intimidation measures against media independence activists who are supposed to be irreducible to Beijing's charm. The aim is to split the independence camp and structure the opposition86.

The repeated victory of the Republic of China's political indigenization in Taiwan - Chen Shui-bian was re-elected in 2004 - led the KMT, its President Lien Chan in particular, to approach the CCP and visit the Chinese continent. At the end of 2004, Liu Huijin published a program book entitled Witness of 330 years of Hongmen. His project is embodied in the World Hongmen Union - WHU (Zhonghua quanqiu Hongmen lianmeng中華全球洪門聯盟). Its objective is to face an increasingly chaotic society (shehui de luanxiang社會的亂象) for veterans (laobing 老兵)87, by transforming Hongmen groups into public interest structures (gongyi zuzhi公益組織) which, as patriotic groups in the sphere of the people (minjian aiguo tuanti 民間愛國團體) will work for social stability, national development and, therefore, peaceful reunification (heping tongyi和平統一).88

In 2008, the KMT returned to power with the election of Ma Ying-jeou (馬英九) who immediately implemented a policy of rapprochement with Beijing. The context seems ideal for the political rise of the Hongmens. Their transnational project to federate into a patriotic and "citizen" movement from Taiwan, where they are legal, can only take shape, however, if all the entities of the network also have a recognized legal status. Between 2010 and 2013, the Malaysia Hong Men Association (Persatuan Kebajikan Hoong Men Malaysia) is taking steps to become a legal structure, in line with the line advocated by WHU89. At the same time, the Hongmens and the Taiwanese Green Belt regularly display their friendship and their structural and ideological proximity, not to say their reconciliation.

In 2012, the growth of WHU coincided with the re-election of KMT Ma Ying-jeou in Taiwan and the appointment of Xi Jinping as head of a CCP that assumed its statism and sovereignty. The United Front's task now is not only to soften, but to attract (xina 吸纳) the elite of patriotic forces outside the Party to marginalize the forces "hostile" to the CCP - in this case all those who openly refuse Taiwan's reunification with the Continent. This convergence of interests, not without ulterior motives, between the KMT and the CCP means that relations between the two shores of the Strait are strengthened around shared values, but in a balance of power in favour of Beijing. This rapprochement gives greater importance to the bridging structures of the "people's sphere", since they are both promoted in the PRC, as links between the Party and the people, and possible in Taiwan, in the name of diversity of opinion in a democratic framework.

Liu Huijin is increasing his trips to China to promote Hongmen-style kung fu. At these sporting events, which promote a heroic national culture, he meets with many leaders of the United Front's continental system: the Zhigongdang, the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and the United Front's Department of Labour. In the spring of 2012, he was honoured as Life President of the Chinese Association of Entrepreneurs of Both Shores of the Strait (Zhonghua haixia liang'an qiyejia lianhehui中华海峡两岸企业家联合)90, located in the PRC.

In early January 2013, he mentioned, in a press release91, that his reform of Hong Kong was supported by the Taiwanese Affairs Office (taiban台办)92 in Guangdong. It must certainly be because Liu Huijin has the honours of the Chinese press. In October, he made the front page of the Modern Entrepreneur magazine (dangdai qiyejia zazhi當代企業家雜誌) for his project of a "city of gastronomy" in Panyu, Guangdong 93. Over the past two years, he said, he had invested 1.3 billion yuan to participate in "the prosperity of the country" (zuguo de fanrong changsheng 祖国的繁荣昌盛)94. In early November 2015, he declared, alongside customs and the Canton Public Security Bureau (Guangdong), his support for the historic meeting taking place in Singapore between Ma Ying-jeou and Xi Jinping95, a first between the heads of state on both sides of the Strait of Formosa, under the guise of their status as party leaders in order to avoid any political recognition of the Republic of China. On this occasion, the Hongmens underline their support for the fulfilment of Xi Jinping's reunifying "Chinese dream "96.

In a few years, Liu Huijin has established himself as a leading figure of the Hongmen. He became its media spokesperson and endeavoured to present them as a Chinese group working overseas for the "Greater China". Although the initiative seems to have been personal, his unifying project echoes the strong points observed in Hong Kong: his activism gives him access to the State Party in Guangdong, where he invests in the name of patriotism.

### Hongmen in Hong Kong and Macau: political laundering of former gangsters

The unifying project comes up against the image of banditry inherited from the British Empire in Southeast Asia. In his program book, Liu Huijin insisted on the nobility of Hongmen history, especially in Malaysia where the old colonial laws rejected them. It omitted Hong Kong and Macau from its global mapping of the nebula, with China represented only by Zhigongdang97. However, at the beginning of the 2010's, he approached, in addition to the Hongmen of Malaysia, members of the 14Ks of Hong Kong and Macau. Should this be seen as an objective assigned to it by Beijing?

Although the Hongmens of Malaysia have become legal, their image remains tarnished by their sulphurous reputation. In September 201398, Persatuan Hoong Men Malaysia insists that it has nothing in common with local gangsters. In September 2016, Liu Huijin also hammered in the Chinese press in Malaysia that "Hongmen are not black societies" (hongmen bushi heishehui洪門不是黑社會)99.

Starting in 2011, WHU is moving closer to Siu Wah, the Hong Kong 14K executive who invested in real estate in Shenzhen (Guangdong) during the 1990s. It presents it as the representative of Hongfashan100, seen as a Hongmen patriotic political entity created by the KMT in the 1940s. In this perspective, the mafia character of the 14K, which results from it, would only be the product of a historical anomaly inherited from the British Empire. In April 2013, the WHU declared that the Hongmen in Hong Kong are considered as black societies because of unfair colonial laws. Liu Huijin announces an action for regularization with the Hong Kong authorities. He said that the Hongmens must be federated in the perspective of the reunification of China by following the model of the Zhigongdang, which is a recognized political party since 1949.101

In May 2013 in Hong Kong, Liu Huijin met Siu Wah who affirmed his willingness to start a legalization process102. At the end of 2014, during the Occupy Central demonstrations, Siu Wah campaigned in a vacuum in Hong Kong to be elected head of the 14K103 branches. It is committed to promoting "the sense of justice of the Chinese people" (tuixing Zhonghua minzu shi da zhengyi sixiang推行中華民族拾大正義思想), "dedicating itself to the protection of the country" (jinzhong baoguo盡忠保國), "spreading the Hongmen culture" (tuiguang Hongmen wenhua推廣洪門文化) to form" the great alliance of the 14K" (14K dalianmeng14K大聯盟)104. At the end of November 2014, Siu Wah, who succeeded in taking the lead of 14K105 through an internal vote, celebrates his birthday in the presence of great figures from this nebula, representatives of other triads in Hong Kong and the Macanese casino world. In his speech, he promised that he would take care of his brothers and said that he had "found thousands of Hong Kong dollars to develop and unify the structure "106. On 18 December 2014, the WHU celebrated its success107, which suggests that the Hong Kong federation was a crucial objective of the unifying reform undertaken since Taiwan.

In early January 2015, Siu Wah, who had just been elected head of 14K, came to Taiwan to meet Liu Huijin108. During the evening, former senior nationalist officers and representatives of the Green Band were present. Liu Huijin praises Siu Wah's talents as a businessman and real estate investor. His qualities make him "the most appropriate candidate" (zui qiadang renxuan最恰當人選) to be the leader of the Hong Kong branch of the World Hongmen Union.

This federating project is coming to a halt because of the anti-triad law inherited from the British. In June 2015, Siu Wah was arrested by the Hong Kong police for presenting himself as the leader of 14K during the November holiday, which is still a local offence109. Having already been prosecuted in the past for belonging to 14K, he was sentenced to 22 months in prison on 10 March 2017110.

In Macau a similar process is taking place. Liu Huijin is developing its network and links with the Zhigong Association (Zhigong xiehui致公協會)111. Nevertheless, it is other Hongmen branches, which have become microparties, that seem to be the most active. At the end of 2012, Dent Broken comes out of prison after serving her sentence for murder. It relies on its local aura as a former head of the 14K to become the federator of the Hongmen-Zhigongdang network. He became Executive Vice-President of the Zhigongdang of Chinese Taiwan (Zhongguo Taiwan Zhigongdang中國台灣致公黨)112, created in 2000, and Honorary President of the New Party of Hong Kong of Taiwan (Taiwan xin hongmendang台灣新洪門黨)113, created in 2011114. According to a persistent but unconfirmed rumour, he is a member of the Regional Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference115. Its economic activity consists in offering luxury services to the rich Chinese who have come to play in Macao. In 2015, he founded the World Association for the History of Hongmen Culture (shijie hongmen lishi wenhua xiehui 世界洪門歷史文化協會), and celebrated the ninetieth anniversary of the Zhigongdang116. In August 2016, he was once again a leading figure in the Macanese casino world and, in July 2017, he organized a major reception with personalities from Hong Kong's 14K and the Macanese game.117 In September 2017, he appeared in Hong Kong for the launch of crypto-currencies in the gaming sector118. In 2018, he initiated from Cambodia, when the headquarters (zongbu 總部) of the World Association for the History of Hongmen was inaugurated in May in Phnom Penh, and Sihanoukville became a new Macao for Chinese tourists, a fundraising campaign for the virtual currency Hongmen (Hongbi 洪幣), which could reach one billion dollars119.

The inclusion of former gangsters from Hong Kong and Macao in the global Hongmen scheme turned towards Taiwan remains tainted by many grey areas. It is not clear that the mapping thus prepared was intended from the outset. Nevertheless, it makes it possible to apprehend the reconfiguration, in several countries, of the United Front policy in the service of Chinese irredentism, in a concerted transnational logic. The approach validates the statutory transformation of the Hongmen Nebula over the decades. From now on, it is the activist potential of these social groups that is sought, in a logic of legalistic, legitimistic and nationalist. The bifurcation between the period 1980-1990 and 2000-2010 supports the hypothesis that the CCP's action should be adapted both to Taiwanese democratic institutions and to the nationalisation of the CCP, which fully includes the diaspora. This inclusive practice towards former gangsters in this new perspective benefits not only those who experienced the United Front in Hong Kong and Macao in the 1980s and 1990s, but also various factions of the gangstero-militaro-nationalist nebula working for "Greater China".

### The competition of the United Bamboos

The political unrest of the Hongmens in favour of reunification was palpable at the end of 2015, during the Taiwanese presidential campaign. But, operating in isolation and partly outside the island, it has no influence on the electoral sociology of the island and therefore on the election. Tsai Ing-wen (蔡英文), the candidate of the Progressive Democratic Party, a party that has not given up on the horizon of independence while defending the status quo between the PRC and the institutions inherited from the Republic of China, is elected. The limits of the Hongmen network in the face of this new political alternation give more visibility to Zhang Anle (張安樂), known as "White Wolf" (Bailang 白狼).

In his youth White Wolf was a member of the United Bamboos (Zhulianbang竹聯幫), a gang of children of "Continentals".120 After emigrating to the United States, he appeared as a backdrop to the 1984 homicide of dissident Henry Liu (Liu Yiliang, 劉宜良), known as "Jiangnan" (江南), sponsored by the KMT's military intelligence services. Arrested for heroin trafficking, he is incarcerated in the United States. After serving his sentence, he moved to Shenzhen at the time of the Tao Siju Public Safety Minister's outstretched hand policy towards patriotic gangsters. In 2004, while Liu Huijin was seeking to unify Hong Kong with Taiwan, White Wolf founded its own structure in Guangdong, the Great Alliance for the Defence of China (Baowei zhonghua datongmeng保衛中華大同盟). On the basis of this, he created in 2005, from the PRC, the Party for the Promotion of the Unification of China (Zhonghua tongyi cujindang,中華統一促進黨). This "Taiwanese" political party has members of the United Bamboos121.  During the construction of this political mechanism, White Wolf increased contacts with PCC122 officials. From the Continent, he specializes in agit-prop for reunification. In September 2009, he took a stand against the Dalai Lama's visit to the island123. In June 2013, while the Hongmens were in the middle of a unification campaign in Hong Kong and Macau, he voluntarily returned to Taiwan to be arrested, due to former unresolved legal disputes. His arrest is like a happening. He took advantage of the presence of the media to implement his reunification programme. As soon as he was released, he turned into a reunification activist.124 He regularly caught the attention of the media by threatening pro-independence demonstrators, offering his security services to the KMT and trying to bribe trade unions.125 In the spring of 2014, a few months before the Occupy Central demonstrations in Hong Kong, he harangued and insulted Taiwanese students of the Sunflower movement, who were demonstrating against the KMT126. In January 2017, his son Zhang Wei (張瑋) and members of the United Bamboos assault Hong Kong Democratic MPs as they get off their planes in Taiwan.127 Zhang Wei became famous again in September by attacking students opposed to the organization of a music festival linked to the PRC.128 Like Liu Huijin, White Wolf organized its political visibility in the mid-2000s. Like Broken Tooth, he dominates his universe. Like Siu Wah, he would obtain large sums of money for his reunificationist positions in the name of Greater China's values. Initial investigations suggest an annual (fuzzy) funding of 5 million yuan for itself, and 30 million yuan for the United Bamboos, probably from the Continent129.

Although White Wolf is not a member of the Hongmen, he regularly shows up at their side. In 2013, he welcomed the organization of kung fu-related festivities by the World Hongmen Union.130 In 2014, he appeared at the birthday ceremony of a Japanese Hongmen chief131. In 2015, he congratulated Dent cassée for its commitment to the dissemination of Hongmen culture132. In 2017, he is a distinguished guest of WHU133 and Wushengshan134. Its proximity to Hongmen in festive or commemorative moments could be matched by human and logistical support during its "solo" demonstrations on the public highway. In May 2016, he organized a march to the headquarters of the Progressive Democratic Party to force it to accept the "1992 Consensus" by which the CCP and the KMT recognized China's unity, even if their political interpretations diverged: "one China, different interpretations" (yi ge Zhongguo, gezi biaoshu一個中國各自表述). The majority of the demonstrators bore the names of the various local branches of his party, which were accompanied by kung fu schools135.

The transformation of the CCP from a State Party under Jiang Zemin to a Nation-State Party under Hu Jintao and Xi Jinping has fostered convergence around the nationalist values promoted by all supporters of "Greater China". As far as Taiwan is concerned, the United Front's policy has adapted to the democratic situation from this angle. However, the impact of the approach remains very marginal in the face of the indigenization of institutions from the Republic of China to Taiwan, and is difficult to assess. As a soft power, a well-known function of the work of Front Uni, the impact is very limited. As an agit-prop, it is a very episodic reality with uncertain relevance. Nevertheless, the whole system allows the system to be established locally and to be updated at regular intervals.

The most interesting aspect is certainly the political laundering which benefits, on a transnational level, the whole nebula, including the former gangsters of Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan expressing a legitimate reunificationist posture. From social margins, Hongmens have become, over nearly four decades and according to the ambitions of the CCP, political margins. This makes them atypical markers of the evolution of the lines of force underlying the Party's changes. Since China has a very relative relationship to the notion of political subjectification136, it is not possible to state that the Hongmens have become full and complete political actors in China, even if they are marginal. However, the democratization of island politics has certainly contributed to the recognition of their status as political activists, however informal it may be in the PRC, since it is in Taiwan that they organize their freedom of speech to better match the CCP's ambitions in the name of their now shared political values.

## Conclusion

United Front's work towards the triads continues and has therefore been well reconstituted since the handover of Hong Kong and Macao. Beyond the prism of reunification that structures it, its evolution reveals the transformations of the CCP over the decades, and its approach to Chinese corporations in transnational spaces.

The deconstruction of the whole allows us to go beyond Épinal's imagery on the subject. All the reconfigurations observed seem to occur only in fits and starts, as this United Front work is characterized by a high dose of opportunism. The political trajectory that is taking shape, as in any nationalist history, is thus revealed to be above all the result of many bifurcations, in the sense of Prasenjit Duara 137, which only find their coherence a posteriori. At the time of Deng Xiaoping, it was probably a trial and error made necessary by the lack of an alternative solution to the unknown of Hong Kong's handover. Under Jiang Zemin, the CCP, freed from the dogmatic constraints of its revolutionary history, assumed authoritarianism, regal repression and seduction to complete the previously recorded retrocession of Hong Kong and Macau. The CCP's appropriation of the symbols of the nation-state and the promises of the Chinese market have finished transforming the partnership offer. From now on, the alliance is no longer the product of a simple bargaining under the guise of "patriotism", but concludes with the monetisable exacerbation of nationalist values, since the "targets" no longer appear as factotums to be contained but autonomous agents to be encouraged. In this scheme, it is no longer necessary for the CCP to act as ostensibly as in the past, as the targets of the United Front seem to anticipate the appeal on their own initiative, as political activists.

In forty years, it is the contours and properties of the United Front from below that have evolved. In a colonial context, it was oriented towards the lowlands, without any legal concern, and was based only on an assessment of a threat, and the modalities to protect against it. In a democratic context, that of Taiwan, it is directed towards legitimate civic forces, their collective demand for the defence of the general interest embodied by the CCP, which should enable them to objectify their action against the subjectivity of the individual voter. This strategy has certainly enabled the "targets" to consider themselves as a kind of political vanguard from the people, interested in public affairs in the name of high nationalist values. Nevertheless, the blurred profile of some of the leading figures in this nebula continues to raise many questions. The relationship to violence remains an issue but has been reversed: under Deng, the aim was to contain it in order to avoid abuses that would undermine the CCP's appeasement policy. Under Jiang, it became a reality opposable to the British, but remained a nuisance to be fought when it became endemic. From now on, it becomes a punctual mode of action in the empire's markets against those who remain deaf to the United Front strategy. In any case, it is not directly attributable to the CCP since it remains factually an expression of anger from the "sphere of the people", which the Party may argue to hear at the appropriate time.

Further work would be required to fully understand the present problem. A few scattered elements could serve as leads to extend it. While these alliances remain poorly known, their limitations are more apparent. As the work of United Front is exclusively at the service of the construction of the CCP, its implementation remains subject to the Party's imperatives. In the late 1990s, public order disturbances led the CCP to use force while the fight against financial malpractice was not on the agenda. Xi Jinping's campaign against corruption, money laundering and refugee fraud abroad could lead to the end of some partnerships. When Liu Huijin invested in his gastronomic city in Panyu, Guangdong, his contacts included Guangzhou Yinghong Consultant (Guangzhou Yinghong zixun youxian gongsi广州鹰宏咨询有限公司), which specializes in the legal immigration of wealthy Chinese people able to invest in Canada138. Judicial or disciplinary operations conducted by the CCP, including the search for economic fugitives under the Fox Hunt program139, could have an impact on this nebula - unless its representatives become "patriotic informants".

In Taiwan, bills were drafted at the end of 2017 to allow political financing by a third country to be treated as an intelligence offence with a foreign power.140 Similarly, the definition of organized criminal group could be revised to facilitate the consideration of violent political activism. If such texts were to be adopted and implemented, the island configuration of United Front work could change.

In Hong Kong, the deployment of the United Front network, particularly Zhigongdang, is hampered by the colonial judicial legacy. The abolition or at least the revision of the anti-triad law could become a political issue in the former British colony if the United Front towards the Hongmen were to continue there. Unless this colonial survival finds other more immediate functions. On 18 July 2018 in Hong Kong, a local independence party, the Hong Kong National Party (Xianggang minzudang香港民族黨) of Andy Chan (Chan Ho-tin / Chen Haotian 陳浩天), was banned, on the legal basis of the Societies Ordinance, which is primarily considered to be the anti-triad law but which, taken literally, can apply to any alleged structured conspiracy action, on the pretext that it would undermine national security.141 British law certainly remains a local brake on the United Front's transnational expansion towards the Hongmens, whitewashed of their sulphurous image in the name of politics and become activists for the occasion. However, this same text is thus transformed into an additional regalian utility in the former colony for and by the Nation-State Party, heir to the entire history of China, in order to silence political activists who claim to be democratic. Through this new bifurcation, and a certain irony of history, the British legislative heritage becomes a lever of the CCP to apply to Hong Kong the modalities of its irredentist nationalism with Chinese characteristics (Zhongguo tese中国特色) in the "respect" of the formula "one country, two sytems".

### About the author

Emmanuel Jourda holds a PhD in political science from EHESS (CECMC). His main research interest focuses on the postrevolutionnary form of the Chinese political regime, through the lenses of the social work of the United Front policy, promoted by the Chinese Communist Party.
